Simulation 2:
Using OPNET Simulate a four node point-to-point network, and connect the links as follows:
n0-n2, n1-n2 and n2-n3. Apply TCP agent between n0-n3 and UDP agent between n1-n3.
Apply relevant applications over TCP and UDP agents by changing the parameters and
determine the number of packets sent by TCP/UDP.
Step 1: Create a New Project
Step 2: Creating network topology:
 Select eth4_slip4_multihomed_client (4 numbers) from the client_server tool in Object
Palette.
 elect an ethernet_server.
 Select ethernet from Object Palette.
 Connect them using the 10BaseT links.
 Select Application Config and Profile config objects.
Step 3: Configuring network application Right click on the Application definition object.
 Select Edit Attributes.
 Select 2 rows for applications
 Select the FTP application for TCP traffic and set the traffic to High Load.
 Select the video conferencing application for UDP traffic and set the traffic to High-
Resolution Video.
 Check Apply Changes to Selected Objects and click Ok.
Step 4: Configure profile
 Right click on Profile Definition object and select Edit Attributes.
 TCP profile: Assign the values for the various fields as
 In row0.set Profile Name = tcp
 Select Applications. Set row=1.Go to row0 set Name = video, Start Time Offset to
constant(1), in Repeatability, Inter Repetition Time to constant(1) and Number of
Repetition to unlimited and Repetition Pattern to concurrent.
 In Repeatability, Inter Repetition Time to constant (1) and Number of Repetition to
exponential (0.1) and
 Repetition Pattern to Concurrent.
 Repeat the same setting for row1 set Profile Name = udp
 Click on Apply Changes to Selected Objects and click on OK.
Step 5: Configure the network objects
 Right click on the appropriate object i.e. client node or ethernet server.
 Select Edit Attributes.
 Click on Application Supported Profiles and choose edit.
 Apply both the profiles to the client nodes.
 Click Ok.
 Click on Application Supported Services and choose edit.
 Apply the FTP application in case of Ethernet server object and for client nodes select the
Video application.
 This is to simulate FTP-TCP-IP for Server and Video-UDP-IP for client nodes.
 Click Ok.
 Check Apply Changes to Selected Objects and click on Ok.
Step 6: Choose statistics:
 Right click on the workspace and Select Choose Individual Statistics from Node Statistics as
Traffic Received and Traffic sent.
Step 7: Run the simulation
 Click run simulation icon from the toolbar.
 Set the Duration to 120 seconds.
 Click Run.
Step 8: View Results
 Right click on the work space and select View Results.
 Select the statistics from the View Results.
 Select Sample Sum instead of As Is.
 Click Show button to view the graphs.
Interpretation:
Notice the difference in scale in the Y-Axis. For TCP the range is in 1000s and in UDP in 10000s.
This means the amount of data sent and received in UDP is much higher than that in UDP, which
implies a higher data rate and therefore a higher data loss.
These graphs show that for UDP the loss rate is high especially since this is a video conferencing
application with high data rate. However, for TCP, since congestion control is applied the loss rate
